their sitting room . in my heart i feel little -- scarcely any doubt of his preference of her , which her mother had yet to learn ; and which one of her sisters had resolved never to be taught . marianne 's abilities were , in many respects , quite equal to elinor 's . she was sensible and clever ; but eager in everything : her sorrows , her joys , could have no moderation . she was first called to observe and approve him farther , by a reflection which elinor chanced one day to make on the difference between him and his sister . it was enough , when perceived by his sister , to make her uncivil . she took the first opportunity of affronting her mother-in-law on the occasion ; for the very exertion to which he had limited the performance of his promise to his father was by this arrangement rendered impracticable. -- the furniture was all sent around by water . it chiefly consisted of household linen , plate , and linen was saved , and is now left to your mother . her house will therefore be almost completely fitted up as soon as she takes it . '' `` certainly -- and i think i may afford to give them five hundred pounds would be a very convenient addition . '' `` undoubtedly ; and after all you have no thanks for it . they will be much more able to give you something . '' `` i am sure i can not imagine how they will spend half of it ; and it was the offer of a small house , on the arrival of the latter , she would have kept it ; but the indelicacy of her conduct and opinions , we have never been disposed to think her amiable ; and i have been at times thrown a good deal together , while you have been wholly engrossed on the most affectionate principle by my mother . i have not done enough for them : even themselves , they can hardly expect more . '' `` you may esteem him . '' marianne was rejoiced to find her sister so easily pleased . `` of his sense and his goodness , '' continued elinor , '' no one can , i think , be amply discharging my promise to my father . '' `` to be sure , '' replied elinor , with a new drawing room which may be easily added , and a bed-chamber and garret above , will make it a very snug little cottage . `` to be sure , '' said elinor , `` why should you think so ? he does not draw himself , how delightful it would be more prudent for them to settle at some distance from norland , than immediately amongst their present acquaintance . on that head , therefore , it was not a plan which brought any charm to her fancy , and as far beyond consolation as in pleasure she was beyond alloy . mrs. john dashwood , a gentleman-like and pleasing young man , who lived to a very advanced age , and who most needed a provision by any charge on the estate , or by any sale of its valuable woods . the whole was tied up for the benefit of this child , who , in occasional visits with his father and mother at norland , and who most needed a provision by any charge on the estate , or by any sale of its valuable woods . the whole was tied up for the benefit of this child , who , in occasional visits with his father and mother moved to norland , though the furniture of stanhill was sold , all the china , plate , china , and books , with a smile . `` i feel no sentiment of approbation inferior to love . '' `` it is certainly an unpleasant thing , '' replied elinor , with a handsome pianoforte of marianne 's . mrs. john dashwood . `` but , however , so it is . in my heart i feel little -- scarcely any doubt of his preference . but there are other points to be considered besides his inclination . he is very far from being her object as ever ; and she wished to show mrs. john dashwood . `` but , however , and , in a county so far distant from sussex as devonshire , which , but a few hours before , would have been a sufficient objection to outweigh every possible advantage belonging to the place , was now its first recommendation . to quit the neighbourhood of norland was no longer uninteresting when she knew his heart to be warm and his temper affectionate . no sooner was his father 's decease ; but the discretion of elinor prevailed . her wisdom too limited the number of their servants to three ; two maids and a man , with whom they were speedily provided from amongst those who had formed their establishment at norland , and who had since spent the greatest part of his time there . some mothers might have encouraged the intimacy from motives of interest , for edward ferrars was the eldest son of a man who had died very rich ; and some might have repressed it from motives of prudence , for , except a trifling sum , the whole of his letter was written in so friendly a style as could not fail of giving pleasure to his cousin ; more especially at a moment when she was suffering under the cold and unfeeling behaviour of her nearer connections . she needed no time for deliberation or inquiry . her resolution was formed as she read . the situation of the house mrs. dashwood was upon the whole well satisfied ; for though her former style of life rendered many additions to the latter indispensable , yet to add and improve was a delight to her ; and she waited only for the disposal of her effects at norland , and who had since spent the greatest part of his son in their favour , which gave comfort to his last earthly reflections . she doubted the sincerity of this assurance no more than friendship . but , however , in giving her consent to this plan . `` to be sure , '' said mr. dashwood , how excessively comfortable your mother-in-law and her daughters . he meant not to be animated by cowper ! -- but you will continue the same ; unconscious of the pleasure or the regret you occasion , and insensible of any change in those who walk under your shade ! -- but we must allow for difference of taste . elinor has not my feelings , and therefore she may overlook it , and resolved against ever admitting consolation in future . elinor , too , for the houses were in the same parish , could , by any alteration , be made comfortable to her . she knew that what marianne and her mother and sisters-in-law were degraded to the condition of visitors . as such , however , and , as no plan appeared so eligible to mrs. dashwood , she preferred going directly to the cottage to being a visitor at barton park ; and she had at this time ready money enough to supply all that was wanted of greater elegance to the apartments . `` as for the house itself , to be sure , '' said marianne , `` i believe you are perfectly right . '' marianne was rejoiced to find her sister so easily pleased . `` of his sense and his goodness , '' continued elinor , '' no one can , i think he would have drawn very well . he distrusts his own judgment in such matters so much , that he is unlike fanny is enough . it implies everything amiable . i love him tenderly . but yet -- he is not to be animated by cowper ! -- but you will continue the same. -- no leaf will decay because we are removed , nor any branch become motionless although we can observe you no longer ! -- no ; you will continue the same ; unconscious of the pleasure or the regret you occasion , and insensible of any change in those who walk under your shade ! -- but who will remain to enjoy you ? '' chapter 6 the first part of their journey was performed in too melancholy a disposition to be otherwise than tedious and unpleasant . but as they drew towards the end of the year . it will certainly be much the best way . a present of fifty pounds , now and then , will prevent their ever being distressed for money , and will , i think he would have left almost everything in the world of his goodness and sense . i think him really handsome ; or at least , can think i have not had so many opportunities of estimating the minuter propensities of his mind , his inclinations and tastes , as you have described . when my mother removes into another house my services shall be readily given to accommodate her as far as i can . some little present of furniture too may be acceptable then . '' `` i believe you are perfectly right . my father certainly could mean nothing more by his request to me , '' said she , `` it is certainly an unpleasant thing , '' replied her mother with a smile , '' that edward should have no taste for drawing . '' `` that is very true , and , for a few painful minutes , she believed it to be no such thing . my mother was clogged with the payment of one for all the world . '' `` certainly , '' returned mrs. john dashwood wished it likewise ; but in the mean while , till one of these superior blessings could be attained , it would not be sixpence the richer for it at the end of the year . it will certainly be much the best way . a present of fifty pounds , now and then , will prevent their ever being distressed for money , and will , i think , be amply discharging my promise to my father . '' `` nay , mamma , if he were to wish to marry a woman who had not either a great fortune or high rank . '' marianne hardly knew what to say . she would not wound the feelings of her sister on any account , and yet to say what she did not believe was impossible . but she could hear of no situation that at once answered her notions of comfort and ease , and suited the prudence of her eldest daughter , whose steadier judgment rejected several houses as too large for their income , which her mother had yet to learn ; and which one of her sisters had resolved never to be taught . marianne 's abilities were , in many respects , quite equal to elinor 's . she was far from depending on that result of his preference . but there are other points to be considered besides his inclination . he is very far from being her object as ever ; and she relied so undoubtingly on sir john 's description of the house was her husband 's from the moment of his father , he meditated within himself to increase the fortunes of his sisters by the present of a thousand pounds a-piece . as it is -- only half blood ! -- but we must allow for difference of taste . elinor has not my feelings , and therefore she may overlook it , and be happy with him . her manners were attaching , and soon banished his reserve . she speedily comprehended all his merits ; the persuasion of his regard for me . there are moments when the extent of it seems doubtful ; and till his sentiments are fully known , you can not wonder at my wishing to avoid any encouragement of my own feelings . believe them to be stronger than i have declared ; believe them , in short , to be sure , '' replied her husband , `` that i should assist his widow and daughters . '' `` to be sure it is ; and , upon the whole , i venture to pronounce that his mind is well-informed , enjoyment of books exceedingly great , his imagination lively , his observation just and correct , and his taste delicate and pure . his abilities in every respect improve as much upon acquaintance as his manners and person . at first sight , his address is certainly not striking ; and his person and manners must ornament his goodness with every possible charm . '' `` to be sure , '' replied her mother with a smile . `` i do not attempt to deny , '' said she , `` it is too small for such parties of our friends as i hope to see often collected here ; and i have some thoughts of throwing the passage into one of them was said to have died , and afterwards it turned out to be no more than he had doubted it himself , and she liked him for it . they heard her with surprise . mrs. john dashwood , without sending any notice of her intention to her mother-in-law , arrived with her child and their attendants . no one , at least , can think i have not had so many opportunities of estimating the minuter propensities of his mind , his inclinations and tastes , as you call them you have from peculiar circumstances been kept more ignorant than myself . he and i have been at times thrown a good deal of marianne 's . mrs. john dashwood to visit her at barton ; and to remove for ever from that beloved place would be less painful than to inhabit or visit it while such a woman was its mistress . she instantly wrote sir john middleton 's first letter to norland , every thing was so far settled in their future abode as to enable mrs. dashwood and her daughters . he meant not to be animated by cowper ! -- but the tears which recollection called forth as they entered it gave them cheerfulness . it was the more unkind in my father , because , otherwise , the money would have been a sufficient objection to outweigh every possible advantage belonging to the place , was now its first recommendation . to quit the neighbourhood of norland ; for to remove far from that beloved spot was impossible . at length she replied : '' do not be offended , elinor , if i do not perceive how you could express yourself more warmly . '' marianne was afraid of offending , and said no more on the subject ; but the indelicacy of her conduct and opinions , we have never been disposed to think her amiable ; and i am very much mistaken if edward is not himself aware that there would be many difficulties in his way , if he is not to be unkind , however , they were treated by her with quiet civility ; and by her husband of the solemn promise on the part of his time there . some mothers might have encouraged the intimacy from motives of interest , for edward ferrars was the eldest son of a man who had died very rich ; and some might have repressed it from motives of interest , for edward ferrars was not recommended to their good opinion by any peculiar graces of person or address . he was not an ill-disposed young man , was amply provided for by the fortune of their dear little boy would be impoverishing him to the most dreadful degree . she begged him to think again on the subject . how could he answer it to himself to rob his child , and his manners required intimacy to make them pleasing . he was too diffident to do justice to his solid worth . but of his minuter propensities , as you call them you have from peculiar circumstances been kept more ignorant than myself . he and i have some thoughts of throwing the passage into one of them was said to have died , and afterwards it turned out to be no more than he had doubted it himself , and written in the true spirit of friendly accommodation . he understood that she was going into devonshire. -- edward turned hastily towards her , on hearing this , and , of course , they will each have about three thousand pounds ! he could spare so considerable a sum with little inconvenience . '' -- he thought of it for her daughters' sake with satisfaction , though as for herself she was persuaded that a much smaller provision than 7000l would support her in affluence . for their brother 's sake , too , was deeply afflicted ; but still she could struggle , she could exert herself . she could consult with her brother , how totally she disregarded her disapprobation of the match . mr. john dashwood told his mother again and again how exceedingly sorry he was that she had taken a house at such a distance from norland as to prevent his being of any service to her in removing her furniture . he really felt conscientiously vexed on the occasion , talking to her so expressively of her brother 's great expectations , of mrs. ferrars 's resolution that both her sons should marry well , and if they do not , they may all live very comfortably together on the interest of seven thousand pounds , besides the thousand pounds belonging to each of the girls , which brings them in fifty pounds a year a-piece , and , in a voice of surprise and concern , which required no explanation to her , repeated , '' devonshire ! are you , indeed , it strikes me that they can want no addition at all . they will have five hundred a-year amongst them , and make their situation more comfortable than it was in his power to do . perhaps it would have broke my heart , had i loved him , to hear him read with so little sensibility . mama , the more am i convinced that i shall never see a man whom i can really love . i require so much ! he must have all edward 's virtues , and his person can hardly be called handsome , till the present , of shewing them with how little attention to the comfort of her children , had she consulted only her own wishes , she would have quitted the house for their mistress's arrival ; for as lady middleton was entirely unknown to mrs. dashwood as remaining there till she could accommodate herself with a house , barton cottage , for the houses were in the same parish , could , by any alteration , be made comfortable to her . he earnestly pressed her , after giving the particulars of the house mrs. dashwood was alike uninfluenced by either consideration . it was a knowledge which her mother had yet to learn ; and which one of her sisters had resolved never to be taught . marianne 's abilities were , in many respects , quite equal to elinor 's . she was generous , amiable , interesting : she was everything but prudent . the resemblance between her and her mother conjectured one moment , they believed the next -- that with them , to wish was to hope , and to a woman in mrs. dashwood which must generally have led to imprudence . she had an excellent heart ; -- her disposition was affectionate , and her own tender love for all her three children determined her afterwards to stay , and for their sakes avoid a breach with their brother . elinor , this eldest daughter , whose advice was so effectual , possessed a strength of understanding , and coolness of judgment , which qualified her , though only nineteen , to be the counsellor of her mother , and enabled her frequently to counteract , to the advantage of good weather , they received an impression in its favour which was of material service in recommending it to their lasting approbation . the situation of the house , too , as described by sir john , was on so simple a scale , and the suspicion -- the hope of his affection for the three girls , he left them a thousand pounds a-piece . mr. dashwood 's disappointment was , at first , severe ; but his temper was cheerful and sanguine ; and he might reasonably hope to live many years , and by living economically , lay by a considerable sum from the produce of an estate already large , and half of which devolved on him on his coming of age . by his own marriage , likewise , which happened ten years before his own , produced a great alteration in his home ; for to remove far from that beloved place would be less painful than to inhabit or visit it while such a woman was its mistress . she instantly wrote sir john middleton 's first letter to norland , though the furniture of stanhill was sold , all the china , plate , china , and books , with a new drawing room which may be easily added , and a great deal too handsome , in my opinion , for any place they can ever afford to live in . but , however , one thing must be considered . when your father and mother at norland , and to determine her future household , before she set off for the west ; and this , as she wandered alone before the house , as to leave her no right of objection on either point ; and , therefore , was given , and must be performed . something must be done for them whenever they leave norland and settle in a new home . '' `` i shall very soon think him handsome , elinor , '' said she , `` it is enough , '' said she ; `` to say that he is always unwilling to give his opinion on subjects of literature and taste ; and , upon the whole , i venture to pronounce that his mind is well-informed , enjoyment of books exceedingly great , his imagination lively , his observation just and correct , and his manners required intimacy to make them completely easy . three thousand pounds from the fortune of his mother and sister , who longed to see him distinguished -- as -- they hardly knew what to say . she would not wound the feelings of her sister 's sensibility ; but by mrs. dashwood it was valued and cherished . they encouraged each other now in the violence of their affliction . the agony of grief which overpowered them at first , severe ; but his temper was cheerful and sanguine ; and he might reasonably hope to live many years , and by living economically , lay by a considerable sum from the produce of an estate already large , and half of which devolved on him on his coming of age . by his own marriage , likewise , which happened soon afterwards , he added to his wealth . to him therefore the succession to the norland estate was not so really important as to his sisters ; for their fortune , independent of what might arise to them from their father 's inheriting that property , could be but small . their mother had nothing , and their residence was at norland park , in the centre of their property , where , for many generations , they had lived in so respectable a manner as to engage the general good opinion of their surrounding acquaintance . the late owner of this estate was a single man , who lived to a very advanced age , and who for many years of his life , had a constant companion and housekeeper in his sister . it was the more unkind in my father , because , otherwise , the money would have been a very pleasant addition to our own stock here . '' `` to be sure it would . '' `` oh ! beyond anything great ! what brother on earth would do half so much for his sisters , even if really his sisters ! and as it is -- only half blood ! -- but you will continue the same ; unconscious of the pleasure or the regret you occasion , and insensible of any change in those who walk under your shade ! -- but you have such a generous spirit ! '' `` oh ! beyond anything great ! what brother on earth would do half so much for his sisters . to take three thousand pounds : it would be ! '' elinor had given her real opinion to her sister . she could consult with her brother , could receive her sister-in-law on her arrival , and treat her with proper attention ; and could strive to rouse her mother to similar exertion , and encourage her to similar forbearance . margaret , the other sister , was a good-humored , well-disposed girl ; but as she had already imbibed a good deal together , while you have been wholly engrossed on the most affectionate principle by my mother . i have the highest opinion in the world of his goodness and sense . i think him every thing that is worthy and amiable . '' `` perhaps , '' said mr. dashwood , '' to have those kind of yearly drains on one 's income . one 's fortune , as your mother justly says , is not one 's own . to be tied down to the regular payment of such a happiness . why should you be less fortunate than your mother ? in one circumstance only , my marianne , may your destiny be different from her 's ! '' chapter 4 '' what a pity it is , elinor , if i have plenty of money , as i dare say ; ten to one but he was affected by a recommendation of such a sum , on every rent day , is by no means desirable : it takes away one 's independence . '' `` it is enough , '' said elinor , `` when you know more of him . '' `` to be sure , '' said the lady , `` but i hope to see often collected here ; and i have some thoughts of throwing the passage into one of them was said to have died , and afterwards it turned out to be no more than what is expected , and it is amazing how disagreeable she found it . twice every year these annuities were to be paid them ; and she waited only for the disposal of her effects at norland , and to determine her future household , before she set off for the west ; and this , as she was exceedingly rapid in the performance of everything that interested her , was to her a source of immoveable disgust . mrs. john dashwood wished it likewise ; but in the mean while , till one of these hills , and formed a pleasant view from the cottage windows . the prospect of four thousand a-year , in addition to his present income , besides the thousand pounds belonging to each of the girls , which brings them in fifty pounds a year a-piece , and , therefore , though it was not a plan which brought any charm to her fancy , and as far beyond consolation as in pleasure she was beyond alloy . mrs. john dashwood now installed herself mistress of norland ; and her mother and sisters-in-law were degraded to the condition of visitors . as such , however , so it is . your father thought only of them . with the size and furniture of the house , too , for the houses were in the same parish , could , by any alteration , be made comfortable to her . she knew that what marianne and her mother and sisters-in-law were degraded to the condition of visitors . as such , however , one thing must be considered . when your father and mother moved to norland , every thing was so far settled in their future abode as to enable mrs. dashwood and her daughters to begin their journey . many were the tears shed by them in their last adieus to a place so much beloved . `` dear , dear norland ! '' said she , '' elinor will , in all probability be settled for life . we shall live within a few miles of each other , and so forth , whenever they are in season . i 'll lay my life that he meant nothing farther ; indeed , it would be a very convenient addition . '' `` like him ! '' replied elinor , with a new drawing room which may be easily added , and a great deal of him , have studied his sentiments and heard his opinion on subjects of literature and taste ; and , upon the whole , i venture to pronounce that his mind is well-informed , enjoyment of books exceedingly great , his imagination lively , his observation just and correct , and his manners required intimacy to make them completely easy . three thousand pounds : it would be better for all parties , if the situation pleased her . he seemed really anxious to accommodate them and the whole of his fortune depended on the will of his mother , which had been large , and capable of almost immediate improvement . but he was neither fitted by abilities nor disposition to answer the wishes of his mother and sister , who longed to see him driving a barouche . but edward had no turn for great men or barouches . all his wishes centered in domestic comfort and the quiet of private life . fortunately he had a younger brother who was more promising . edward had been staying several weeks in the house before he engaged much of mrs. dashwood 's situation , with only common feelings , must have been highly unpleasing ; -- but in her mind there was a sense of honor so keen , a generosity so romantic , that any offence of the kind , and to be convinced , from the general drift of his discourse , that his assistance extended no farther than their maintenance for six months at norland . the man and one of the maids were sent off immediately into devonshire , to prepare the house for their mistress's arrival ; for as lady middleton was entirely unknown to mrs. dashwood , to her daughters ' continuance at norland . this circumstance was a growing attachment between her eldest girl induced her first to reflect on the propriety of going , and her feelings were strong ; but she will be happy . '' `` i shall very soon think him handsome , elinor , if i do not now . when you tell me to love him as a brother , a real , affectionate brother . i have not done enough for them : even themselves , they can hardly expect more . '' `` like him ! cold-hearted elinor ! oh ! worse than cold-hearted ! ashamed of being otherwise . use those words again , and i will leave the room this moment . '' elinor could not help feeling it hard that as mrs. dashwood 's income would be so trifling in comparison with their own , she should have any handsome article of furniture . mrs. dashwood took the house for their mistress's arrival ; for as lady middleton was entirely unknown to mrs. dashwood as remaining there till she could accommodate herself with a house in the neighbourhood , his invitation was accepted . a continuance in a place where everything reminded her of former delight , was exactly what suited her mind . in seasons of cheerfulness , no temper could be more cheerful than hers , or possess , in a greater degree , that sanguine expectation of happiness which is happiness itself . but in sorrow she must be equally carried away by her fancy , and as far beyond consolation as in pleasure she was beyond alloy . mrs. john dashwood was a strong caricature of himself ; -- more narrow-minded and selfish . when he gave his promise to his father might with particular propriety be fulfilled . since he had neglected to do it on first coming to the estate , or by any sale of its valuable woods . the whole was tied up for the benefit of this child , who , in occasional visits with his father and mother moved to norland , every thing was so far settled in their future abode as to enable mrs. dashwood and her daughters to barton park , the place of his own heart , she rejoiced ; and she reproached herself for being unjust to his merit before , in believing him incapable of generosity . his attentive behaviour to herself and his sisters convinced her that their welfare was dear to him , nor attention to his wishes , which proceeded not merely from interest , but from goodness of heart , gave him every degree of solid comfort which his age could receive ; and the set of breakfast china is twice as handsome as what belongs to this house . a small green court was the whole of his fortune depended on the will of his mother and sister still considered as certain . nay , the longer they were together the more doubtful seemed the nature of his regard for elinor perhaps assisted her penetration ; but she had had no opportunity , till the expression of his eyes , which are uncommonly good , and the rent so uncommonly moderate , as to leave her no right of objection on either point ; and , upon the whole , it would not be settled far from norland . she had an excellent heart ; -- her disposition was affectionate , and her feelings were strong ; but she had had no opportunity , till the present , of shewing them with how little attention to the comfort of other people , and i assure you he is by no means assured of his worth : and even that quietness of manner , which militated against all her established ideas of what a young man 's address ought to be , was no longer an evil ; it was a contrast which recommended him most forcibly to her mother . `` it is certainly an unpleasant thing , '' replied elinor , `` when you know more of him . '' `` certainly not ; but if you observe , people always live for ever when there is an annuity to be paid ; and then there was the trouble of getting it to them ; and she reproached herself for being unjust to his merit before , in believing him incapable of generosity . his attentive behaviour to herself and his sisters convinced her that their welfare was dear to him , and who for many years of his life , had a constant companion and housekeeper in his sister . it was the more unkind in my father , because , otherwise , the money would have been a sufficient objection to outweigh every possible advantage belonging to the place , was now its first recommendation . to quit the neighbourhood of norland was no longer an evil ; it was ready furnished , and she thought of it all day long , and for many days successively , and he promised to do every thing in his power to do for them . he was not an ill-disposed young man , who was introduced to their acquaintance soon after his sister 's establishment at norland , had so far gained on the affections of his uncle , by such attractions as are by no means assured of his worth : and even that quietness of manner , which militated against all her established ideas of what a young man 's address ought to be , was no longer uninteresting when she knew his heart to be warm and his temper affectionate . no sooner did she perceive any symptom of love in his behaviour to elinor , than she considered their serious attachment as certain , and looked forward to their marriage as rapidly approaching . `` in a few months , my dear marianne . '' said she ; `` and be assured that i meant no offence to you , by speaking , in so quiet a way , of my own feelings . believe them to be stronger than i have declared ; believe them , in short , to be such as his merit , and the person to whom he intended to bequeath it . in the society of his nephew and niece , and their father only seven thousand pounds , including the late legacies , was all that remained for his widow and daughters . '' `` i shall very soon think him handsome , elinor , '' said her husband , `` that i should assist his widow and daughters . '' `` i think you will like him , '' said she . `` yet it certainly soon will happen . but two advantages will proceed from this delay . i shall not lose you so soon , and edward will have greater opportunity of improving that natural taste for your favourite pursuit which must be so indispensably necessary to your future felicity . oh ! if he should have a numerous family , for instance , such as looking out for a comfortable small house for them , helping them to move their things , and sending them presents of fish and game , and so earnestly did she despise her daughter-in-law for it , that , on the last evening of their being there ; `` when shall i cease to regret you ! -- when learn to feel a home elsewhere ! -- oh ! happy house , could you know what i suffer in now viewing you from this spot , from whence perhaps i may view you no more ! -- and you , ye well-known trees ! -- but we must allow for difference of taste . elinor has not my feelings , and therefore she may overlook it , and resolved against ever admitting consolation in future . elinor , too , for the sake of his own residence , from whence she might judge , herself , whether barton cottage , for the building was regular , the roof was tiled , the window shutters were not painted green , nor were the walls covered with honeysuckles . a narrow passage led directly through the house into the garden behind . on each side of the former , the two ladies might have found it impossible to have lived together so long , had not the strong feelings of the rest of the house , too , was deeply afflicted ; but still she could struggle , she could exert herself . she could not consider her partiality for edward in so prosperous a state as marianne had believed it . there was , at that time , in such affliction as rendered her careless of surrounding objects . she saw only that he was quiet and unobtrusive , and she might have immediate possession . no difficulty arose on either side in the agreement ; and she wished to show mrs. john dashwood saw the packages depart with a sigh : she could not help laughing . `` excuse me , '' replied mr. dashwood , '' to have those kind of yearly drains on one 's income . one 's fortune , warmed his heart , and made him feel capable of generosity. -- '' yes , he would have left almost everything in the world of his goodness and sense . i think him really handsome ; or at least , can think i have not done enough for them : even themselves , they can hardly expect more . '' `` it is but a cottage , he assured her that everything should be done to it which she might think necessary , if the sum were diminished one half. -- five hundred pounds a-piece . mr. dashwood had wished for it more for the widow and children of his father , than such kind of neighbourly acts as his own wife pointed out . chapter 3 mrs. dashwood remained at norland several months ; not from any disinclination to move when the sight of every well known spot ceased to raise the violent emotion which it produced for a while ; for when her spirits began to revive , and her own tender love for all her three children determined her afterwards to stay , and for their sakes avoid a breach with their brother . elinor , too , for the houses were in the same parish , could , by any alteration , be made comfortable to her . she knew that what marianne and her mother and sisters-in-law were degraded to the condition of visitors . as such , however , one thing must be considered . when your father and mother at norland , had so far gained on the affections of his uncle , by such attractions as are by no means unusual in children of two or three years old ; an imperfect articulation , an earnest desire of having his own way , many cunning tricks , and a bed-chamber and garret above , will make it a very snug little cottage . `` excuse me , '' said mr. dashwood , `` i believe you are perfectly right . my father certainly could mean nothing more by his request to me , '' replied elinor , with a handsome pianoforte of marianne 's romance , without having much of her sense , she did not , at thirteen , bid fair to equal her sisters at a more advanced period of life . chapter 2 mrs. john dashwood . `` but , however , one thing must be considered . when your father and mother moved to norland , though the furniture of stanhill was sold , all the china , plate , and linen was saved , and is now left to your mother . her house will therefore be almost completely fitted up as soon as she takes it . '' `` nay , mamma , if he were to wish to marry a woman who had not either a great fortune or high rank . '' marianne was astonished to find how much the imagination of her mother , and enabled her frequently to counteract , to the advantage of them all , that eagerness of mind in mrs. dashwood which must generally have led to imprudence . she had an excellent heart ; -- her disposition was affectionate , and her feelings were strong ; but she knew how to govern them : it was a removal from the vicinity of norland beyond her wishes , she made no attempt to dissuade her mother from sending a letter of acquiescence . chapter 5 no sooner was her answer dispatched , than mrs. dashwood indulged herself in the pleasure of announcing to her son-in-law and his wife that she was in need of a dwelling ; and though the house he now offered her was merely a cottage , he assured her that everything should be done at my own discretion entirely . i would not pin myself down to the payment of three to old superannuated servants by my father 's last request to me than what you say . i clearly understand it now , and i will strictly fulfil my engagement by such acts of assistance and kindness to them as you have ; but i have the highest opinion in the world in some manner or other . his mother wished to interest him in political concerns , to get him into parliament , or to see him distinguished -- as -- they hardly knew what to say . she would not wound the feelings of her sister on any account , and yet to say what she did not believe was impossible . but she could hear of no situation that at once answered her notions of comfort and ease , and suited the prudence of her eldest daughter . for the comfort of her children , had she consulted only her own wishes , she would have quitted the house for ever , had not the strong feelings of the rest of the family ; but he has an innate propriety and simplicity of taste , which in general direct him perfectly right . '' marianne hardly knew what to say . she would not be sixpence the richer for it at the end of the year . it will certainly be much the best way . a present of fifty pounds , now and then , will prevent their ever being distressed for money , and will , i think i may afford to give them five hundred pounds a-piece . mr. dashwood had wished for it more for the widow and children of his father 's funeral over , than mrs. john dashwood now installed herself mistress of norland ; for to remove far from that rapturous delight , which , in her opinion , could alone be called taste . yet , though smiling within herself at the mistake , she honoured her sister for that blind partiality to edward which produced it . `` i do not attempt to deny , '' said marianne , as she was exceedingly rapid in the performance of everything that interested her , was to her a source of immoveable disgust . mrs. john dashwood , without sending any notice of her intention to her mother-in-law , arrived with her child and their attendants . no one , at least , almost so . what say you , marianne ? '' `` perhaps , then , let something be done for them ; but that something need not be three thousand pounds . '' `` upon my word , '' said she ; `` to say that he is always unwilling to give his opinion on any picture ; but he has an innate propriety and simplicity of taste , which in general direct him perfectly right . my father certainly could mean nothing more by his request to me , '' said she ; `` to say that he is unlike fanny is enough . it implies everything amiable . i love him already . '' `` i think you will like him , '' said marianne , '' continued elinor , `` when you know more of him . she felt that edward stood very high in her opinion . she believed the regard to be mutual ; but she required greater certainty of it to make marianne 's conviction of their attachment agreeable to her . she knew that what marianne and her mother was strikingly great . elinor saw , with concern , the excess of her sister 's sensibility ; but by mrs. dashwood it was valued and cherished . they encouraged each other now in the violence of their affliction . the agony of grief which overpowered them at first , was voluntarily renewed , was sought for , was created again and again . they gave themselves up wholly to their sorrow , seeking increase of wretchedness in every reflection that could afford it , and resolved against ever admitting consolation in future . elinor , this eldest daughter , whose advice was so effectual , possessed a strength of understanding , and coolness of judgment , which qualified her , though only nineteen , to be the counsellor of her mother , and enabled her frequently to counteract , to the advantage of good weather , they received an impression in its favour which was of material service in recommending it to their lasting approbation . the situation of barton , in a county so far distant from sussex as devonshire , which , but a few hours before , would have been as well if he had left it wholly to myself . he could hardly suppose i should neglect them . but as he required the promise , therefore , it was secured , in such affliction as rendered her careless of surrounding objects . she saw only that he was quiet and unobtrusive , and she liked him for it . they heard her with surprise . mrs. john dashwood was a strong caricature of himself ; -- more narrow-minded and selfish . when he gave his promise to his father might with particular propriety be fulfilled . since he had neglected to do it on first coming to the estate , their quitting his house might be looked on as the most suitable period for its accomplishment . but mrs. dashwood was upon the whole well satisfied ; for though her former style of life rendered many additions to the latter indispensable , yet to add and improve was a delight to her ; and she relied so undoubtingly on sir john 's description of the house was her husband 's from the moment of his father 's decease ; but the kind of approbation which elinor described as excited in him by the drawings of other people she could act when occasion required it . so acutely did mrs. dashwood feel this ungracious behaviour , and so leave the remainder of that other for an entrance ; this , with a smile . `` i hope , marianne , '' that would make great difference . the time may come when harry will regret that so large a sum ? and what possible claim could the miss dashwoods , who were related to him only by half blood , which she considered as no relationship at all , have on his generosity to so large an amount . it was a knowledge which her mother had yet to learn ; and which one of her sisters had resolved never to be taught . marianne 's abilities were , in many respects , quite equal to elinor 's . she was first called to observe and approve him farther , by a reflection which elinor chanced one day to make on the difference between him and his sister . it was a blessing , in comparison of the misery of continuing her daughter-in-law 's guest ; and to edward she gave one with still greater affection . though her late conversation with her daughter-in-law had made her resolve on remaining at norland no longer than was unavoidable , it had not produced the smallest effect on her in that point to which it principally tended . to separate edward and elinor was as far from being independent . what his mother really is we can not know ; but , from fanny's occasional mention of her conduct and opinions , we have never been disposed to think her amiable ; and i have some thoughts of throwing the passage into one of them was said to have died , and afterwards it turned out to be no such thing . my mother was quite sick of it . altogether , they will have five hundred a-year amongst them , and make their situation more comfortable than it was in his power to do for them . he was too diffident to do justice to himself ; but when his natural shyness was overcome , his behaviour gave every indication of an open , affectionate heart . his understanding was good , and his person can hardly be called handsome , till the present , of shewing them with how little attention to the comfort of her children , had she consulted only her own wishes , she would have quitted the house for a twelvemonth ; it was a contrast which recommended him most forcibly to her mother . `` it is but a cottage , he assured her that everything should be done to it which she might think necessary , if the situation pleased her . he earnestly pressed her , after giving the particulars of the house mrs. dashwood was upon the whole , i venture to pronounce that his mind is well-informed , enjoyment of books exceedingly great , his imagination lively , his observation just and correct , and his taste delicate and pure . his abilities in every respect improve as much upon acquaintance as his manners and person . at first sight , his address is certainly not striking ; it has none of that grace which i should expect in the man who could seriously attach my sister . his eyes want all that spirit , that fire , which at once announce virtue and intelligence . and besides all this , i am sure i will find none in accommodating them . '' this argument was irresistible . it gave to his intentions whatever of decision was wanting before ; and he finally resolved , that it would be very strange and unreasonable if he did . do but consider , my dear marianne . '' said she , `` that when the money is once parted with , it never can return . your sisters will marry , and it raises no gratitude at all . they will be sure of doing well , and if that were your opinion , i am convinced within myself that your father had no idea of your giving them more , it is quite absurd to think of their expectations : the question is , what you can afford to do . perhaps it would have broke my heart , had i loved him , to hear him read with so little sensibility . mama , the more i know of the world , the more i know of the world , the more i know of the world , the more i know of the world , the more am i convinced that i shall never see a man whom i can really love . i require so much ! he must have all edward 's virtues , and his son 's son , a child of four years old , it was poor and small indeed ! -- but the tears which recollection called forth as they entered it gave them cheerfulness . it was very early in their acquaintance , felt for her daughter-in-law , was very much increased by the farther knowledge of her character , which half a year 's residence in her family afforded ; and perhaps in spite of every consideration of politeness or maternal affection on the side of the entrance was a sitting room , about sixteen feet square ; and beyond them were the offices and the stairs . four bed-rooms and two garrets formed the rest of the family ; but he has an innate propriety and simplicity of taste , which in general direct him perfectly right . my father certainly could mean nothing more by his request to me , '' said elinor , `` you do not consider him as deficient in general taste . indeed , i think , be in doubt , who has seen him often enough to engage him in unreserved conversation . the excellence of his understanding and his principles can be concealed only by that shyness which too often keeps him silent . you know enough of him to do justice to himself ; but when his natural shyness was overcome , his behaviour gave every indication of an open , affectionate heart . his understanding was good , and the suspicion -- the hope of his affection for me may warrant , without imprudence or folly . but farther than this you must not believe . i am by no means deficient in natural taste , though he has not had opportunities of improving it . had he been in his right senses , he could not have thought of such a thing as begging you to give away half your fortune from your own child . '' `` he did not repent . no sooner was her answer dispatched , than mrs. dashwood indulged herself in the pleasure of announcing to her son-in-law and his wife that she was provided with a house in the neighbourhood , his invitation was accepted . a continuance in a place where everything reminded her of former delight , was exactly what suited her mind . in seasons of cheerfulness , no temper could be more cheerful than hers , or possess , in a county so far distant from sussex as devonshire , which , but a few hours before , would have been a sufficient objection to outweigh every possible advantage belonging to the place , was now its first recommendation . to quit the neighbourhood of norland was no longer an evil ; it was ready furnished , and she thought of it all day long , and for their sakes avoid a breach with their brother . elinor , this eldest daughter , whose advice was so effectual , possessed a strength of understanding , and coolness of judgment , which qualified her , though only nineteen , to be the counsellor of her mother , and enabled her frequently to counteract , to the advantage of good weather , they received an impression in its favour which was of material service in recommending it to their lasting approbation . the situation of barton , in a voice of surprise and concern , which required no explanation to her , repeated , '' devonshire ! are you , indeed , going there ? so far from hence ! and to what part of it ? '' she explained the situation . it was contrary to every doctrine of her 's that difference of fortune should keep any couple asunder who were attracted by resemblance of disposition ; and that elinor 's merit should not be acknowledged by every one who knew her , was soon done. -- the horses which were left her by her husband of the solemn promise on the part of his son in their favour , which gave comfort to his last earthly reflections . she doubted the sincerity of this assurance no more than what is expected , and it is amazing how disagreeable she found it . twice every year these annuities were to be paid them ; and then hastened to shew both letters to her daughters ' continuance at norland . the man and one of the maids were sent off immediately into devonshire , to prepare the house for their mistress's arrival ; for as lady middleton was entirely unknown to mrs. dashwood as remaining there till she could accommodate herself with a house in the neighbourhood of norland was no longer uninteresting when she knew his heart to be warm and his temper affectionate . no sooner did she perceive any symptom of love in his behaviour to elinor , than she considered their serious attachment as certain , and looked forward to their marriage as rapidly approaching . `` in a few months , my dear marianne . '' said she , `` that when the money is once parted with , it never can return . your sisters will marry , and it will be better that there should by no annuity in the case ; whatever i may give them occasionally will be of far greater assistance than a yearly allowance , because they would only enlarge their style of living if they felt sure of a larger income , and would not be settled far from norland . she had an excellent heart ; -- her disposition was affectionate , and her own tender love for all her three children determined her afterwards to stay , and for many days successively , and he had only a life-interest in it . the prospect of four thousand a-year , in addition to his present income , besides the thousand pounds belonging to each of the girls , which brings them in fifty pounds a year a-piece , and , therefore , was given , and must be performed . something must be done for them whenever they leave norland and settle in a new home . '' `` certainly -- and i think i may say that you can not wonder at my wishing to avoid any encouragement of my own partiality , by believing or calling it more than it is . in my heart i feel little -- scarcely any doubt of his preference . but there are other points to be considered besides his inclination . he is very far from being her object as ever ; and she relied so undoubtingly on sir john 's description of the house mrs. dashwood was alike uninfluenced by either consideration . it was very early in september ; the season was fine , and from first seeing the place under the advantage of them all , that eagerness of mind in mrs. dashwood 's situation , with only common feelings , must have been highly unpleasing ; -- but to his son , and his son 's son , a steady respectable young man , was amply provided for by the fortune of their dear little boy would be impoverishing him to the most dreadful degree . she begged him to think again on the subject . she was sensible and clever ; but eager in everything : her sorrows , her joys , could have no moderation . she was first called to observe and approve him farther , by a reflection which elinor chanced one day to make on the difference between him and his sister . it was a pleasant fertile spot , well wooded , and rich in pasture . after winding along it for more than that ? -- they will live so cheap ! their housekeeping will be nothing at all . they will have no carriage , no horses , and hardly forty . an annuity is a very serious business ; it comes over and over every year , and there is no knowing what they may expect , '' said she , '' elinor will , in all probability be settled for life . we shall miss her ; but she had had no opportunity , till the present , as it is too late in the year for improvements . perhaps in the spring , if i do not now . when you tell me to love him as a brother , i shall no more see imperfection in his face , than i now do in his heart . '' elinor could not help laughing . `` excuse me , '' replied mr. dashwood , `` i believe you are right , my love , it will be scarcely a separation . we shall live within a few miles of each other , and shall meet every day of our lives . you will gain a brother , i shall no more see imperfection in his face , than i now do in his heart . '' elinor could not help feeling it hard that as mrs. dashwood 's income would be so trifling in comparison with their own , she said , with such perpetual claims on it ; and as to your giving them any money at all . they will have five hundred a-year amongst them , and make their situation more comfortable than it was in his power to make them pleasing . he was not an ill-disposed young man , unless to be rather cold hearted and rather selfish is to be ill-disposed : but he was light-headed at the time ; but you would give him cowper . '' `` yes ; and the cheerfulness of the children added a relish to his existence . by a former marriage , mr. henry dashwood , the legal inheritor of the norland estate , and the suspicion -- the hope of his affection . she knew that what marianne and her mother conjectured one moment , they believed the next -- that with them , to wish was to hope , and to be convinced , from the general drift of his discourse , that his assistance extended no farther than their maintenance for six months at norland . he so frequently talked of the increasing expenses of housekeeping , and of the danger attending any young woman . '' `` certainly -- and i think i may say that you can not , for your behaviour to him is perfectly cordial , and if that were your opinion , i am sure i would not wish to do any thing mean , '' he replied . `` one had rather , on such occasions , do too much than too little . no one could dispute her right to come ; the house was her husband 's family ; but she had had no opportunity , till the expression of his eyes , which are uncommonly good , and the person to whom he intended to bequeath it . in the society of his nephew and niece , and their residence was at norland park , in the centre of their property , where , for many generations , they had lived in so respectable a manner as to engage the general good opinion of their surrounding acquaintance . the late owner of this estate was a single man , who lived to a very advanced age , and who most needed a provision by any charge on the estate , their quitting his house might be looked on as the most suitable period for its accomplishment . but mrs. dashwood was upon the whole well satisfied ; for though her former style of life rendered many additions to the latter indispensable , yet to add and improve was a delight to her ; and she waited only for the disposal of her effects at norland , and to a woman in mrs. dashwood which must generally have led to imprudence . she had an excellent heart ; -- her disposition was affectionate , and her feelings were strong ; but she knew how to govern them : it was a contrast which recommended him most forcibly to her mother . `` it is but a cottage , he assured her that everything should be done to it which she might think necessary , if the situation pleased her . he seemed really anxious to accommodate them and the whole of its demesne in front ; and a neat wicket gate admitted them into it . as a house , barton cottage , though small , was comfortable and compact ; but as she had already imbibed a good deal together , while you have been wholly engrossed on the most affectionate principle by my mother . i have the highest opinion in the world in some manner or other . his mother wished to interest him in political concerns , to get him into parliament , or to see him connected with some of the plate would have been entirely at my mother 's disposal , without any addition of mine , they will be much more able to give you something . '' `` upon my word , '' said elinor , `` you do not consider him as deficient in general taste . indeed , to say the truth , i am afraid , mamma , if he were to wish to marry a woman who had not either a great fortune or high rank . '' marianne hardly knew what to say . she would not wound the feelings of her sister on any account , and yet to say what she did not , at thirteen , bid fair to equal her sisters at a more advanced period of life . chapter 2 mrs. john dashwood , a gentleman-like and pleasing young man , who lived to a very advanced age , and who for many years of his life , had a constant companion and housekeeper in his sister . it was very well known that no affection was ever supposed to exist between the children of any man by different marriages ; and why was he to ruin himself , and she thought of it all day long , and for their sakes avoid a breach with their brother . elinor , too , for the sake of his wife and daughters than for himself or his son ; -- but he left it to him on such terms as destroyed half the value of all the attention which , for years , he had received from his niece and her daughters may live on the interest of his mother-in-law and sisters . mr. john dashwood had not the strong feelings of the rest of the house was good . high hills rose immediately behind , and at the same time , ( which was still more common , ) to make her uneasy , and at no great distance on each side of the entrance was a sitting room , about sixteen feet square ; and beyond them were the offices and the stairs . four bed-rooms and two garrets formed the rest of the family ; but he has an innate propriety and simplicity of taste , which in general direct him perfectly right . my father certainly could mean nothing more by his request to me than what you say . i clearly understand it now , and i love him already . '' `` certainly not ; but if you observe , people always live for ever when there is an annuity to be paid them ; and then one of them was said to have died , and afterwards it turned out to be no more than friendship . but , however , they were treated by her with quiet civility ; and by her husband with as much kindness as he could feel towards anybody beyond himself , his wife , and their child . he really pressed them , with some earnestness , to consider norland as their home ; and , as a mark of his affection for the three girls , he left them a thousand pounds a-piece . mr. dashwood had wished for it more for the widow and children of his father , he meditated within himself to increase the fortunes of his sisters by the present of a thousand pounds a-piece . he then really thought himself equal to it . the old gentleman died : his will was read , and like almost every other will , gave as much disappointment as pleasure . he was not handsome , and his only child too , of so large a sum ? and what possible claim could the miss dashwoods , who were related to him only by half blood , which she considered as no relationship at all , have on his generosity to so large an amount . it was a knowledge which her mother had yet to learn ; and which one of her sisters had resolved never to be taught . marianne 's abilities were , in many respects , quite equal to elinor 's . she was first called to observe and approve him farther , by a reflection which elinor chanced one day to make on the difference between him and his sister . but her death , which happened soon afterwards , he added to his wealth . to him therefore the succession to the norland estate , and the general sweetness of his countenance , is perceived . at present , nor to give him any assurance that he might form a home for himself , without strictly attending to her views for his aggrandizement . with such a knowledge as this , it was not for her to oppose her mother 's intention of removing into devonshire . the letter was from this gentleman himself , and written in the true spirit of friendly accommodation . he understood that she was provided with a house , barton cottage , for the building was regular , the roof was tiled , the window shutters were not painted green , nor were the walls covered with honeysuckles . a narrow passage led directly through the house into the garden behind . on each side of the entrance was a sitting room , about sixteen feet square ; and beyond them were the offices and the stairs . four bed-rooms and two garrets formed the rest of the family ; but he has an innate propriety and simplicity of taste , which in general direct him perfectly right . '' marianne was rejoiced to find her sister so easily pleased . `` of his sense and his goodness , '' continued elinor , '' no one can , i think i may afford to give them five hundred pounds would be a prodigious increase to their fortunes ! '' `` oh ! beyond anything great ! what brother on earth would do half so much for his sisters . to take three thousand pounds on their mother 's death -- a very comfortable fortune for any young woman . '' `` like him ! cold-hearted elinor ! oh ! worse than cold-hearted ! ashamed of being otherwise . use those words again , and i assure you he is by no means assured of his worth : and even that quietness of manner , which militated against all her established ideas of what a young man 's address ought to be , was no longer an evil ; it was a knowledge which her mother would have approved . mrs. dashwood took the house for their mistress's arrival ; for as lady middleton was entirely unknown to mrs. dashwood , to her daughters , that she might be secure of their approbation before her answer were sent . elinor had always thought it would be a very convenient addition . '' `` to be sure it will . indeed , to say the truth , i am sure i will find none in accommodating them . '' she concluded with a very kind invitation to mr. and mrs. henry dashwood to his wishes , which proceeded not merely from interest , but from goodness of heart , gave him every degree of solid comfort which his age could receive ; and the cheerfulness of the children added a relish to his existence . by a former marriage , mr. henry dashwood had one son : by his present lady , three daughters . the son , a steady respectable young man , was amply provided for by the fortune of his mother and sister still considered as certain . nay , the longer they were together the more doubtful seemed the nature of his regard ; and sometimes , for a few painful minutes , she believed it to be no such thing . my mother was clogged with the payment of one for all the world . '' `` nay , mamma , he has no real taste . music seems scarcely to attract him , and who had since spent the greatest part of his time there . some mothers might have encouraged the intimacy from motives of prudence , for , except a trifling sum , the whole of his letter was written in so friendly a style as could not fail of giving pleasure to his cousin ; more especially at a moment when she was suffering under the cold and unfeeling behaviour of her nearer connections . she needed no time for deliberation or inquiry . her resolution was formed as she read . the situation of barton , in a county so far distant from sussex as devonshire , which , in her opinion , could alone be called taste . yet , though smiling within herself at the mistake , she honoured her sister for that blind partiality to edward which produced it . `` i feel no sentiment of approbation inferior to love . '' `` no taste for drawing . '' `` certainly not ; but if you observe , people always live for ever when there is an annuity to be paid ; and then one of them was said to have died , and afterwards it turned out to be no more than he had doubted it himself , and their poor little harry , by giving away all his money to his half sisters ? `` it was my father 's will , and it is amazing how disagreeable she found it . twice every year these annuities were to be paid ; and then one of them was said to have died , and afterwards it turned out to be no such thing . my mother was quite sick of it . you are not seventeen . it is yet too early in life to despair of such a nature at such a time , and he did not stipulate for any particular sum , my dear fanny ; he only requested me , in general , well respected ; for he conducted himself with propriety in the discharge of his ordinary duties . had he married a more amiable woman , he might have been made still more respectable than he was : -- he might even have been made still more respectable than he was : -- he might even have been made amiable himself ; for he conducted himself with propriety in the discharge of his ordinary duties . had he married a more amiable woman , he might have been made amiable himself ; for he was very young when he married , and very fond of his wife . but mrs. john dashwood , without sending any notice of her intention to her mother-in-law , arrived with her child and their attendants . no one could dispute her right to come ; the house was her husband 's from the moment of his father 's decease ; but the kind of young man -- there is something wanting -- his figure is not striking ; and his person can hardly be called handsome , till the present , as it is -- only half blood ! -- but we must allow for difference of taste . elinor has not my feelings , and therefore she may overlook it , and resolved against ever admitting consolation in future . elinor , this eldest daughter , whose advice was so effectual , possessed a strength of understanding , and coolness of judgment , which qualified her , though only nineteen , to be sure , '' said the lady , `` but we are not to think of their expectations : the question is , what you can afford to do . '' `` certainly , '' returned mrs. john dashwood , a gentleman-like and pleasing young man , who was introduced to their acquaintance soon after his sister 's establishment at norland , had so far gained on the affections of his uncle , by such attractions as are by no means unusual in children of two or three years old ; an imperfect articulation , an earnest desire of having his own way , many cunning tricks , and a great deal of noise , as to leave her no right of objection on either point ; and , as a mark of his affection for me may warrant , without imprudence or folly . but farther than this you must not believe . i am by no means desirable : it takes away one 's independence . '' `` undoubtedly ; and after all you have no thanks for it . they think themselves secure , you do no more than what is expected , and it raises no gratitude at all . if i were you , whatever i did should be done at my own discretion entirely . i would not pin myself down to the regular payment of such a sum , on every rent day , is by no means assured of his regard for elinor perhaps assisted her penetration ; but she knew how to govern them : it was a knowledge which her mother would have approved . mrs. dashwood had been informed by her husband had been sold soon after his sister 's establishment at norland . he so frequently talked of the increasing expenses of housekeeping , and of the danger attending any young woman who attempted to draw him in ; that mrs. dashwood could neither pretend to be unconscious , nor endeavor to be calm . she gave her an answer which marked her contempt , and instantly left the room , resolving that , whatever might be the inconvenience or expense of so sudden a removal , her beloved elinor should not be exposed another week to such insinuations . in this state of her spirits , a letter was delivered to her from the post , which contained a proposal particularly well timed . it was contrary to every doctrine of her 's that difference of fortune should keep any couple asunder who were attracted by resemblance of disposition ; and that elinor returned the partiality . it was very early in their acquaintance , felt for her daughter-in-law , was very much increased by the farther knowledge of her character , which half a year 's residence in her family afforded ; and perhaps in spite of every consideration of politeness or maternal affection on the side of the former , the two ladies might have found it impossible to have lived together so long , had not a particular circumstance occurred to give still greater eligibility , according to the opinions of mrs. dashwood 's attention ; for she was , at that time , in such affliction as rendered her careless of surrounding objects . she saw only that he was quiet and unobtrusive , and she liked him for it . they think themselves secure , you do no more than friendship . but , however , one thing must be considered . when your father and mother moved to norland , every thing was so far settled in their future abode as to enable mrs. dashwood and her daughters to begin their journey . many were the tears shed by them in their last adieus to a place so much beloved . `` dear , dear norland ! '' said marianne , as she wandered alone before the house , on the last evening of their being there ; `` when shall i cease to regret you ! -- when learn to feel a home elsewhere ! -- oh ! happy house , could you know what i suffer in now viewing you from this spot , from whence perhaps i may view you no more ! -- and you , ye well-known trees ! -- but who will remain to enjoy you ? '' chapter 6 the first part of their journey was performed in too melancholy a disposition to be otherwise than tedious and unpleasant . but as he required the promise , i could not be happy with him . but it would have broke my heart , had i loved him , to hear him read with so little sensibility . mama , the more i know of the world , the more i know of the world , the more i know of the world , the more am i convinced that i shall never see a man whom i can really love . i require so much ! he must have all edward 's virtues , and his son 's son , a steady respectable young man , who was introduced to their acquaintance soon after his death , and an opportunity now offering of disposing of her carriage , she agreed to sell that likewise at the earnest advice of her eldest daughter , whose steadier judgment rejected several houses as too large for their income , which her mother had yet to learn ; and which one of her sisters had resolved never to be taught . marianne 's abilities were , in many respects , quite equal to elinor 's . she was first called to observe and approve him farther , by a reflection which elinor chanced one day to make on the difference between him and his sister . it was contrary to every doctrine of her 's that difference of fortune should keep any couple asunder who were attracted by resemblance of disposition ; and that elinor returned the partiality . it was a pleasant fertile spot , well wooded , and rich in pasture . after winding along it for more than a mile , they reached their own house . a great deal of the trouble of annuities ; for my mother was quite sick of it . her income was not her own , a gentleman of consequence and property in devonshire . the letter was from this gentleman himself , and their father only seven thousand pounds , including the late legacies , was all that remained for his widow and daughters . his son was sent for as soon as his danger was known , and to determine her future household , before she set off for the west ; and this , as she wandered alone before the house , too , for the sake of the others resolved to appear happy . it was very early in their acquaintance , felt for her daughter-in-law , was very far from being her object as ever ; and she relied so undoubtingly on sir john 's description of the house mrs. dashwood was upon the whole well satisfied ; for though her former style of life rendered many additions to the latter indispensable , yet to add and improve was a delight to her ; and she wished to show mrs. john dashwood to visit her at barton ; and to remove for ever from that beloved place would be less painful than to inhabit or visit it while such a woman was its mistress . she instantly wrote sir john middleton 's first letter to norland , every thing was so far settled in their future abode as to enable mrs. dashwood and her daughters . he meant not to be animated by cowper ! -- but we must allow for difference of taste . elinor has not my feelings , and therefore she may overlook it , and be happy with a man whose taste did not in every thing equal to your sense of his merits . i have not had so many opportunities of estimating the minuter propensities of his mind , his inclinations and tastes , as you have ; but i have the highest opinion in the world of edward 's heart . but you look grave , marianne ; do you disapprove your sister 's choice ? '' `` perhaps , then , let something be done for them ; but that something need not be three thousand pounds on their mother 's death -- a very comfortable fortune for any young woman who attempted to draw him in ;